So build is called whenever you call set state and you learned that build
now rebuild this widget and all its child widgets
and that's really important.
If you call set state, only the build method of this widget is called but then, since this code is executed
and we have a couple of widgets which we create in that build method, as you learned, new instances of these
widgets are created
and whenever a new instance of a widget is created, its constructor and its build method is called as
well.
So when we call build here in the main.dart file, that means that also all these widgets down here will
be created and there, build methods will execute.
Now you have room for optimization here and I'll come back to that
but generally, that is what's wanted, that is how it should work.
The idea here of course is that the configuration because remember, the widget tree is all about the
configuration changes and that then leads to a new output on the screen
but how does this actually work then if the widgets are replaced with new instances?
Does this mean that the elements and the rendered objects,
remember these are the other two trees, also rebuild? Back to drawing, we had these three trees - we have
the widget tree, we have the element tree and we have the render tree so to say. Now in the widget
tree, we have a stateful widget,
so our own stateful widget here.
Now that stateful widget of course might have a child widget which means it's using some other widgets
in its build method, for example a container and that container then also might have a child widget which
we nest in there which is a text widget and that's very basic widget tree here of course.
Now as you learned, when Flutter first encounters this,
so when the app starts typically, it will create elements for that. So it will create a new element here
for the stateful widget,
it will create one for the container and it will also create one for the text.
So these elements are created automatically.
Now as you also learned, it will also render something on the screen, so it will then, once these elements
are created and so on,
also go ahead and create the actual render objects which control the content on the screen.
Now the interesting part happens. In our stateful widget, we call set state, so something changes there,
hence the build method gets called in the stateful widget here.
So here in this widget, we call the build method because set state was called.
Now what's actually happening here is that first of all, we have to realize that the state is managed
in a separate object
as I showed on the slide earlier.
So the state is connected to the element and not directly connect to the widget.
So when you call set state, that edits this state object. Now the widget then, once set state is called,
is marked as dirty, which means it's basically replaced with a new one.
So we get a new my stateful widget which reflects that new state.
So that new state
we have stored in that state object here
kind of ends up in the new widget and with end up, I mean it's output there or passed down to the children
there or whatever you are doing with your state data.
This new my stateful widget replaces the old one which was removed because it's dirty
changed. The state object here however, this one, does not change, it stays here, it's not replaced. It's
still the same object as before,
so the state object is detached from the widget object. The widget is replaced with the state changes,
the state is not replaced and
that's of course important because your state, your data which changes over time should be able to change
over time,
it would be bad if that would be swapped out for a new state object whenever you try to change it because
then changes basically wouldn't be possible. So instead now, we've got a new stateful widget and there,
the build method is called and the build method being called of course also means that we rebuild this
entire widget tree.
So for the container, we get a new instance and for the text, we get a new instance
but what does this now mean for the element and the render tree, since we have three new widget instances
and with this, I really mean three brand new objects stored in memory.
Does this mean that the elements in the render objects here also are replaced?
No, it does not mean that. The cool thing is that the elements hold a reference at a widget and they also
so to say hold some information on how to identify their related widget.
The first important piece of information each element has is it knows its position, so it knows which
child elements it has,
so its basically like a skeleton for your widget tree. Your widgets have a certain structure, your element
tree replicates this structure and actively stores that information
and in addition to that, otherwise this first piece of information would be useless, an element knows which
kind or which type of widget it was connected to.
So this here knows it was connected to the my stateful widget.
The second element knows it was connected to the container widget, so to a widget of type container
and this last element here knows it was connected to a widget of type text.
So now every element here in the element tree knows which child elements it has, so which connection to
other elements it has and which type of widget held the configuration for the element that should then
actively be rendered to the screen.
So since that is known, when we get a new stateful widget up there which replaces the existing one, what
Flutter does is it checks in that position of the widget tree or of the element tree,
which is kind of the same here,
do I have a my stateful element here
because I'm getting a new my stateful widget and if the answer is yes, like it is here, then this means
that the element is kept
and it simply updates its reference to now point at the new widget here.
That's what's happening, the reference of the element is updated,
the old reference is cleared because the old widget was cleared and now the existing element simply
points at the new widget and it then passes this information on to the render object which is also
kept, so that the render object can update in the places where it needs to update.
So for example if the background color is the same but the text changed, the render object will only
re-render the text pixels on the screen so to say and not everything it doesn't layout itself again
and so on
and this is why Flutter is so efficient.
It has this element tree which is not rebuilt whenever build is called, only the widget tree is rebuilt and
the element tree can automatically update its references to know if a new configuration is available
and if that is available, it passes that information on to the render objects so that these can re-render
on the screen.
Now if you want to learn even more about how Flutter manages all of this internally and which optimizations
it puts into place, you find an interesting article attached to this lecture where you can dive way deeper
but this is basically how it works
and this is why calling build or having the build method called does not mean that the entire screen
re-renders because Flutter has a couple of layers to manage that and calling build or the build method
being called only means that this widget tree,
so that tree of configuration data rebuilt or parts of that tree rebuilt and therefore, Flutter now
checks which parts on the real screen need to be updated.